IDEA 2100
=========

Creativity, Ecology, and Nature Experience
------------------------------------------

### Calendar Description

Students will learn about the interconnected themes of creativity, ecology, sustainability, nature experience, and personal and academic development. They will contextualize their creative and academic inquiries by way of experiences in nature and will broaden their understanding of the relationship between humanity and the natural world.

### Learning Objectives/Outcomes

* Read selected cultural, literary, and historical texts and discuss their origin, development, and contemporary relevance
* Interpret interdisciplinary natural, creative, and spiritual traditions within the context of ecology and sustainability
* Describe the role of natural experience as both an ancient and a current mode of knowledge inquiry
* Evaluate diverse perspectives on the relationship between natural experience and creativity
* Create interdisciplinary projects using strategies developed through experiences in nature

### Content

* Nature and creativity
* Nature as aesthetic experience
* Creative and spiritual inspiration in nature
* Nature as mentor
* Our relationship and lost connection with nature
* Impermanence and cycles (astronomical, biological, climatic, cultural, geological, mythological)
* Learning to listen in the forest
* Embodiment and spirituality in relationship with nature
* Ancestral, Aboriginal, and modern meditation and mindfulness practices in nature
* Deep and social ecology
* Community engagement and natural experience
* Sustainable food

### Essential Skills

#### Creative Thinking and Problem Solving Skills

* Facilitating creative and scientific inquiry, analysis, and evaluation
* Developing problem-solving and synthesis skills in relation to creativity, nature, and the contemporary world
* Practicing the skills required to integrate diverse intellectual and cultural traditions and to develop a critically informed world view
* Developing cross-cultural and interdisciplinary thinking skills
* Developing greater flexibility in contextualizing and synthesizing information​

#### Oral Skills

* Participating in discussions on diverse topics
* Asking questions to synthesize and evaluate information
* Practicing active listening
* Developing greater skills in verbal and non-verbal cultural communication​

#### Interpersonal Skills

* Participating in a diverse multicultural environment
* Responding with clarity, sensitivity, and cultural awareness
* Collaborating with other students in enhancing the collective learning experience
* Offering and receiving appropriate feedback from other students and the instructor​

#### Teamwork and Leadership Skills

* Leading discussions
* Establishing and maintaining cooperative relationships with other students
* Managing self-regulation within a collaborative environment

#### Personal management and entrepreneurial skills

* Taking responsibility for actions and decisions
* Maintaining attitudes of respect and sensitivity toward others
* Taking initiative for project topic selections and completions
​
#### Writing Skills

* Communicating clearly in writing
* Utilizing effective revision and editing skills

#### Reading and Information Skills

* Practicing the ability to read on a wide range of topics
* Search for and synthesizing ideas from readings
* Using standard reference materials

#### Visual Literacy

* Understanding the link between human aesthetics and nature
* Exploring the visual dimensions of complex and dynamic systems​

#### Mathematical Skills

* Exploring the underlying mathematical structures in nature and creativity
* Developing mathematical literacy with regard to the interplay between arts and sciences

#### Intercultural Skills

* Showing sensitivity to the multicultural dimensions of the course materials
* Developing a multicultural point of view with regard to the course content and to contemporary issues influenced by the course content
* Suspending cultural biases so as to fully understand and be informed by the course content
​
#### Technological Skills

* Using a computer
* Using the World Wide Web to search for and locate information
* Participating in online discussions and content sharing​

#### Citizenship and Global Perspective

* Understanding diverse cultural, creative, scientific, and spiritual perspectives
* Participating in a learning environment of global diversity
* Tracing the origins and developments of key creative and scientific movements
* Investigating the diverse and often divergent ways in which cultures understand themselves and their environments
​
### Learning Activities

* Participating in an integrative learning environment that entails a high level of communication, engagement, motivation, and collaboration
* Experiencing nature in multiple locales in the Vancouver area
* Reading materials from a variety of genres and historical periods
* Researching and developing interdisciplinary projects
* Collaborating with other students on group projects and presentations

### Notes

*Note re engagment project: facilitation activities might include bushcraft, storytelling, sit-spot, nature’s grocery store, nature’s medicine cabinet, the art of animal tracking, mapping, bird language, nature rhythms, mindful walking, five-minute fire, nature photography, nutrient cycles, food webs, etc. All assessments are conducted by learners, faculty, and the lab instructor of the course. (No external assessors are utilized on off-campus trips.)

### Required Texts

Beavington, Lee. Common Plants of Greater Vancouver. 5th ed. Surrey: Kwantlen Print Shop, 2013. Print.

Butala, Sharon. The Perfection of the Morning: an Apprenticesehip in Nature. Toronto: Phyllis Bruce Books, 2005. Print.

Krakauer, Jon. Into the Wild.​ New York: Anchor, 1997. Print.

### Recommended Texts

Abram, David. The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human World. New York: Vintage, 1997. Print.

Emerson, Ralph Waldo. Nature. Boston: James Munroe, 2006. Web. July 3, 2013

<http://www.archive.org/details/nature29433gut>.

Kroodsma, Donald. The Singing Life of Birds: The Art and Science of Listening to Birdsong. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2007. Print.

Laird, Ross. A Stone's Throw: The Enduring Nature of Myth. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 2003. Print.

Louv, Richard. Last Child in the Woods: Saving out Children from Nature-Deficit Disorder. New York: Algonquin, 2005. Print.

Pojar, Jim and Andy Mackinnon. Plants of Coastal British Columbia. Edmonton: Lone Pine, 2005. Print.

Thoreau, Henry David. Walden. Salt Lake City: Project Gutenberg, 2007. Web. July 3, 2013

<http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/205>.

Young, Jon, Ellen Haas, and Evan McGown. Coyote's Guide to Connecting with Nature. New York: Owlink Media, 2010. Print.

​
### Possible field sites

1. Ecology Around the Campus

Explore the webs of connection and consider human impacts (positive and negative).

Science angle:  food webs, invasive species, nutrient cycling, plant ID.
Art angle:  patterns and symmetry, mindfulness.


2. Boundary Bay (Tides and Transitions)

Explore the in-between places, the estuary and intertidal zones.  How do organisms such as the screw snail, lugworm and ghost shrimp survive in this chaotic environment?  How do we cope during times of change?  Consider the influence of the moon.

Science angle:  intertidal zone, biodiversity, tides and lunar cycles.
Art angle:  process and product, transitions.


3. Watershed Park (A Walk/Run in the Woods)

Explore the rich tapestry of the forest.  Listen for birdsong.  Every tree has a story to tell in its rings, leaves and symbolism.  What do they tell us?  Stand still, meditate, walk slowly, go for a run.  Experience yourself in ecological immersion.

Science angle:  dendrochronology, bird language, forest ecology (abiotic and biotic factors, indicator species, nurse logs, adaptations, disturbances, etc).
Art angle:  folklore, mythology, aesthetic experience, creativity.


4. Cougar Creek (The River of Time)

Follow the river and be mindful the The Journey.  Water is central to life, a simple compound of hydrogen and oxygen and yet amazingly unique in its properties to sustain life.

Science angle:  limnology (biological, geological, chemical, and physical characteristics of the river), water cycle, water quality (EPT) index.
Art angle:   artistic inspiration, reflection, finding purpose.


5. Delta Nature Reserve (Bogged Down)

Burns Bog is  a globally unique ecosystem, and one of the largest undeveloped urban wilderness areas in North America.  An immense amount of carbon dioxide is trapped within this raised peat bog.  What happens when we get stuck?  How can we shift things?

Science angle:  unique flora and fauna, carbon cycle, climate change, sustainability.
Art angle:  creativity, inspiration, personal growth.


6. Tynehead Fish Hatchery (Life and Death)

Understand how a hatchery works.  Tynehead is run entirely by volunteers.  Perhaps have the opportunity to participate in an egg take.

Science angle:  life cycle (fish), fish biology, sustainability.
Art angle:  life cycle (human), death and birth in art, connection to food.


7. Vancouver Aquarium

Explore the fantastic marine environments at the aquarium.

Science angle:  marine biology, oceanography, evolution, sustainability.
Art angle:  creative inspiration, colour and texture, movement.


Other sites to consider:  Reifel Bird Sanctuary, Serpentine Fen, Bird Banding @ Colony Farm (Saturdays only), Mountain View Conservation Centre (tours only, have unique animals both native and exotic), Campbell Valley Park, Derby Reach Park, Tynehead Park, farmer’s market, walk along power line trail near Kwantlen, have students propose a site.


BACKUP ACTIVITIES (in case of extreme weather):

1. Visit the biology lab.

2. In class activities (dialogues, reflections, preparing for group presentations, ecology games, meditation, embodiment).
