
About meetings and overall participation: I have various roles at Kwantlen (faculty member in several areas, administrator, developer, faculty liaison, etc.), and all of these roles include committee work as well as other types of regular business. Scheduling conflicts are a common occurrence for me (almost all Kwantlen committee meetings take place on Fridays). I try to manage these conflicts in a fair way. In consultation with the Dean and various other administrators, I work to ensure that all groups receive the best balance of time and attention, and I participate fully in all of my roles while not always being able to attend all meetings. For example, during the past year, while I was seconded elsewhere in the university, I attended four Creative Writing department meetings, participated in the search and PD committees, attended several Curriculum Committee (HSCC) meetings, consulted with administration at various times, read every post on Basecamp, and responded to every request made of me. I also developed a new Creative Writing course and ushered it through all required levels of governance (twice). As I was seconded elsewhere at the time, almost all of this work was undertaken on a strictly voluntary basis and was contributed by me as a service to Creative Writing.

As we move forward, I will remain involved even when I am committed on several other fronts, and I will continue to serve the department as requested and as appropriate.

As for my current role as representative on the PD committee, my participation was not something I decided on my own. Rather, it was at the request of the department (in September 2010). If my service in this position is no longer required, please let me know.

With regard to the guild, student representatives approached me (two weeks ago) with a specific request that I be their faculty liaison. I was pleased to see their enthusiasm and commitment, and agreed to fulfill that role. If it is not permissible for the students to select their own faculty liaison, or for me to accept their request without permission from the department, then I will step aside to make way for whatever due process is preferred. I certainly do not wish to act on behalf of the department without approval. I would like to help the students with the guild, but others may also wish to assume this role, and they are welcome to step in.

As I said, I am not able to attend the meeting next week. If, after the meeting, you wish to request that I remove myself from either of the roles that I have been asked to fulfill (PD or guild liaison), please let me know. As always, I am happy to help out, and will do what I can.

