Myth, Culture, and Creativity
=============================

The creative arts are powerful, ancient, and yet delicate practices. We
work quietly, often in isolation, in tentative and mercurial moods. We
revise, and turn back upon our own narratives, and wonder about the
reception our work might meet in the world. Sometimes we hide
manuscripts in drawers, or take deliberate action — as did Franz Kafka
and Mahatma Gandhi — to prevent our creativity from making its way to an
audience. Kafka and Gandhi were both unsuccessful in preventing their
writings from being destroyed; but their impulse to do so, to keep
hooded the hawk of their creativity, is common among artists of all
stripes.

We’re not sure that we have, really, anything to say; or we are afraid
that if our work is not well met we might ourselves be wounded. Or we
believe, as did the ancient Egyptians, that words and images have their
own life, for good or for ill, and that creativity is a means of seizing
the power of the gods. This course attempts to explore this conversation
— between the artist and the wider world — and to find ways of bringing
our creativity safely out of hiding.

We will be exploring myth, and the strategic practices every writer and
artist must learn in wrestling with narrative. Each of us will examine
our strengths — the ways in which the natural mood and flavour of our
creativity makes itself known — and our vulnerabilities as well: how we
get stuck, or lazy, how we lost confidence and gain doubt. How we learn
to shut down and hope the whole thing will go away.

This course is about making a claim for the fundamental right of
storytelling. Within that context, we will explore the ancient practices
of myth-making (particularly as regards family and culture), and the
great gifts we might receive from others of our creative kin (that is to
say, the long tradition of myth-makers).

The threshold between fact and fiction (which is not the same as that
between truth and lie) is one of the territories of myth. In this course
we stake out that territory, inspecting the geology of its forms and
ideals, finding our own individual places to homestead. Myth involves
the search for truth, and fidelity to fact, yet also an awareness that
truth and fact are often provisional, and mythological; they are
shapeshifters on the wide-open plain of creativity. We will explore what
this means, and what to do about it.

The IDEA Skill Set
------------------

Perhaps it’s most helpful to come at interdisciplinary creativity in
terms of a skill set. Thinking and acting in an interdisciplinary way is
really a matter of looking at the process of learning. Instead of
focusing on the “content” we might ask questions about how we identify,
interpret, create, and communicate this content. These are process
questions. Below are some examples of the kinds of considerations we
will explore during our process.

### Creating a “Good” Question

The questions we ask tell us a lot about how we think, the assumptions
we make and what we’re willing to accept as answers. What is a “good”
question? How do questions emerge? Where do they come from? How does a
question evolve? How do we hold space for our questions and how do they
“work” on us? We will discuss these questions about questions, and see
where they lead us.

### Critical Thinking and Crap Detection

We are often quick to believe what we read and what we hear, especially
when it comes from sources that we deem “authoritative.” Teachers,
journal articles, media, books, professors, parents, and peers all have
their own take on what is correct and true. Who is right? How do we know
what we’re hearing is not false or misconstrued? What is true? From what
perspective is it true? What other perspectives can be taken that are
also true? What evidence is being used to support the claim? Is the
evidence appropriate for the kind of claim being made? What ideologies,
assumptions and beliefs are at play? How do they impact the
interpretation of “facts”? And what are facts, anyway?

### Finding, Using and Evaluating Resources

Resources are what we use to accomplish something. We have internal
resources such as courage, empathy, compassion, self-awareness,
mindfulness and so on to help us create, learn and work with the
challenges of life. People in our lives such as teachers, peers,
mentors, and guides also have skills, experience, and knowledge that can
potentially help us accomplish our goals. As well, the internet, books
and other sources of information are valuable resources. How do we know
what resources we need to accomplish a goal? Are they internal,
interpersonal, or codified? What are the means by which we access these
resources? How do we know if the sources we’re accessing are good or the
right ones for our goal? How do we evaluate their quality?

### Communication (speaking, listening, writing, performing)

Language is expressed verbally and non-verbally in a particular
relational context of culture, values and past experience. Our ability
to translate ideas into words and actions, move an audience into a
compelling dialogue, or simply be present to someone else, requires an
awareness of these contexts and good communication skills. How does a
mindful and embodied presence shape how we speak and listen? How do we
write articulately, persuasively, and with accuracy and authenticity?
How do our values shape the way we communicate?

### Working in a Group

Groups offer invaluable opportunities for personal development and
routinely transcend the efforts of any one individual. The following
elements are some of the important capabilities required for healthy
group process:

-   building trust and a culture of collaboration
-   attending to individual needs and the needs of the group
-   sharing responsibility
-   giving and receiving feedback
-   embracing and resolving minor conflicts

Much of our class time will be spent in small and large groups exploring
and developing these skills.

### Following Through on a Process

Any creative process that generates new forms of knowledge (arts,
sciences and otherwise) typically has a number of phases. These phases
don’t always happen in order and are not necessarily distinct events,
but it’s helpful to think about the ecocycle of creative work. First,
there is the discovery of interest or passion. The question or idea may
not even be fully formed at this point, but there’s a spark that feels
like it’s worth following. Next, we immerse ourselves in the topic. We
read, have conversations, mess around with different approaches.
Basically, we commit to learning as much as we can about our passion. At
some point we have consciously consumed as much as we can about the
topic and we need a break from thinking about it. We let the questions
incubate and trust that they are working under the surface in the dark
soil. “Spring” eventually comes, perhaps after a long “winter”. Insights
and breakthroughs emerge. Little shoots pop up out of the soil. We are
careful to not jump to conclusions but instead create space for ideas
and insights to slowly emerge through a process of articulating and
capturing. In the last stages, we bring all the elements together in a
creative synthesis and share the bounty of our harvest.

What is happening at each stage of the creative process? What are the
challenges of each stage? How do we support the work that needs to be
done in each phase? How do we manage our time in such a way that we are
able to do creative work sustainably? Doing the preparatory work,
looking for and taking opportunities, experimenting, being realistic
about time, taking care of mind/body/heart/soul, and attending to other
responsibilities all require good skills in managing our time. And how
do we balance these various factors?

### Self-Awareness and Self-Evaluation

Growing personally and professionally is a process that has no end
point. Although growth is challenging and at times painful, growth is
critical to finding meaning and vitality in our life and work. Living
systems that come to an equilibrium with their environment — that stick
with the status quo and are content living in their comfort zone — do
not live for very long! For humans, growth requires self-evaluation,
which in turn involves looking at our strengths and vulnerabilities,
considering the evidence and feedback in these areas, identifying where
we wish to grow, creating a game plan for how we plan to address our
vulnerabilities, and celebrating our successes.

Self-assessment involves asking questions such about how we wish to
grow. What is involved in growing in a given area? What opportunities
can we find and/or create to grow? How do we take responsibility for
working on ourselves? How does the feedback from others and the results
of our attempts to develop tell us how we are doing? How do we decide
what to do with the feedback we receive from others?

### Learning Experiences

The course will include a variety of learning experiences contingent
upon regular attendance and dedicated participation. Because creative
writing and mythology are both interactive processes, much of the class
time will be devoted to group experiential exercises, individual
reflective tasks, collaborative endeavors, composition, and practical
assignments.

We will create a collaborative environment in this class. We are not
going to cobble together the type of group one often hears about in the
arts: competitive, cut-throat, critical. Instead, we will direct our
efforts toward building upon the individual strengths of each
participant, finding ways for each of us to be self-reflective in terms
of assessing our creative work, discovering a means of protecting the
quality and integrity of our writing. The creative spirit is remarkably
persistent, yet it is also fragile, especially at its inception, and we
must be conscious of this fragility. Think about it: did you not
experience, as a child, the strangulation of your creativity in school,
by way of a culture of insensitive peers or teachers? Why do you think
hardly anyone feels comfortable singing in public, or dancing, or
drawing, or reading their written work to others? We have, most of us,
been the victims of inappropriate feedback and judgment. We have to be
careful about this, in our course, so that we do not harm one another.

And, finally, the goal of the course (from my point of view, at least),
is to have fun: to preserve and nurture the creative and imaginative
spirit that is the foundation of all the arts and sciences.

### Themes

The class structure involves 14 sessions. These sessions will be
balanced between presentations (by the instructor and students) academic
material, group collaboration, and composition. The content for each
session will evolve as the semester progresses. We will cover the
following themes (though, perhaps not in the order listed below):

#### The Nature of Myth

Definitions of mythology (a body of myths) and mythopoetic (the making
of myths). Clarifications of common misunderstandings about myth (e.g.
that myths are false, or that myths obfuscate factual information). An
introduction to myths as carriers of cultural knowledge in the arts and
sciences. Consideration of myths as versions of truth and as effective
containers for sacred, social, political, or scientific information
(e.g. in ancient astronomy and contemporary religion). Examination of
myth-making as a fundamental and necessary function of human nature.
Consideration of the persistence of the myth-making function and its
role in the contemporary world (e.g. the mythologies evolving around
9/11). Examination of the relationship between myth and truth.

#### Myths of Ancient Sumer and Egypt

Introduction to the historical background of the origins of Western
mythology and literature. Explication of Sumerian and Egyptian world
views, with particular emphasis on spirituality, mythological concepts,
and approaches to the imagination. Reading of excerpts from core
Egyptian and Sumerian texts, with particular emphasis on myths that form
the foundation of the literatures of the West. Examination of the ways
in which science and mythology were entwined in the practices and
perspectives of the ancient Egyptians and Sumerians. Introduction to
Egyptian hieroglyphic, the most elaborate writing system ever developed,
and the role of hieroglyphs in the transmission of myth. Exploration of
the transmission of Sumerian and Egyptian mythological ideas into the
contemporary world (e.g. the eye on the American dollar bill).

#### Greek Influences

Exploration of the transmission of myth from the Sumerians and Egyptians
to the Greeks. Explication of Greek adaptations of and contributions to
myth, with emphasis on the traditions of philosophy and theatre. Reading
of selected Greek literary and mythological texts. Examination of the
ways in which science and mythology were entwined in the practices and
perspectives of the Greeks. Examination of the ways in which Greek texts
subsequently influenced the development of European literatures.

#### Myths of China, Japan, and India

Introduction to the historical background of the origins of Eastern
mythology and literature. Explication of ancient Chinese, Japanese, and
Indian world views, with particular emphasis on spirituality,
mythological concepts, and approaches to the imagination. Exploration of
the possible connections between ancient Indian myths and those of
ancient Egypt and Sumer, with particular focus on Kundalini yoga.
Reading of excerpts from ancient Chinese, Japanese, and Indian
mythological texts, with particular emphasis on myths that form the
foundation of the broader literatures of Asia. Exploration of the
transmission of ancient Chinese and Indian mythological ideas into the
contemporary world (e.g. Confucianism and Taoism in modern Asian
business practices, and the Tibetan world view).

#### Shamanic Myths and Cultures

Introduction to the mythologies of ancient aboriginal cultures from
Canada, Australia, Africa, Southeast Asia, and South America.
Introduction to the mythologies of contemporary aboriginal cultures from
Canada, the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Africa, Southeast
Asia, and South America. Explication of the shamanic world view, with
particular emphasis on spirituality, mythological concepts, and
approaches to health and healing. Reading of excerpts from
transcriptions of ancient and contemporary shamanic myths, poems, and
songs. Exploration of the transmission of ancient shamanic myths, by
means of epic poems and songs, into the contemporary world (e.g. the art
of the aboriginal peoples of the Northwest).

#### Europe and the Middle East

Introduction to the transmission and adaptation of ancient myth in the
European cultures of the Common Era. Exploration of the Hermetic
traditions, the rediscovery of ancient texts, and the influence of these
developments on European art and literature after 1500 CE. Examination
of the integration of science and mythology in the development of the
intellectual and political traditions of Europe and North America (e.g.
the Washington Monument and the ground plan of the Mont-Royal
neighbourhood in Montreal). Introduction to the Grail mythologies and
their foundation role in Western literature from 1500 CE to the present.
Reading of excerpts from the mythological texts of Europe and the Middle
East. Examination of European myths and their relevance to contemporary
politics, sports, entertainment and pop culture in Canada.

#### The Psychology of Mythology

Introduction to the tradition of twentieth century myth scholars (Carl
Jung, Joseph Campbell, Mircia Eliade) and their attempts to integrate
all myths into a single continuum of human inquiry and expression.
Reading of selected texts by Jung, Campbell, and Eliade. Examination of
the relationship between myth and personal psychology (e.g. dreams).
Exploration of the psychological models used by scholars to describe the
underlying impulses and functions of myths (e.g. the collective
unconscious). Consideration of the myths of individuality, the
psychological functions that derive from these, and the interplay
between personal and social mythologies. Consideration of the necessity
of myths and of the development of new myths.

#### Mythopoetics in Contemporary Arts and Literature

Examination of the many ways in which myths pervade contemporary
literary and creative traditions. Reading of selected contemporary and
mythological texts from the genres of fiction, non-fiction, and poetry.
Consideration of the ways in which myths are conjoined, truncated, and
adapted for contemporary readers. Introduction to the artist as a
mythological figure (the trickster), and to the mythological role of the
artist in contemporary society. Exploration and application of
mythopoetic writing strategies.

#### Mythology in the Contemporary World

Consideration of current personal myths, familial myths, cultural myths,
and world myths (e.g. myths of apocalypse, myths of the United States as
the gunslinger, the myth of Canada as the North). Examination of popular
myths, controversial myths, and myths which have persisted for hundreds
or thousands of years essentially unchanged. Reading of excerpts from
contemporary mythological texts in the political and social spheres.
Exploration of the contemporary role of myth in world politics,
religion, and spirituality. Consideration of the future directions of
myth in literature, culture, and human nature.

### Assignments

Three creative projects are required for this course: one composition,
one non-literary creative work (painting, sculpture, craft, dance,
etc.), and one documented cultural experience. These projects are
opportunities for you to discover and explore the myths surrounding your
own life and academic interests. We will discuss these projects in
class.

Each project will include a written self-evaluation. The self-evaluation
will include answers to the following questions (answers need not be
itemized):

-   What research did you do to prepare for this project? Research might
    include readings, investigative interviews, online searches,
    self-reflections, ruminations, and many other modalities.
-   What learning resources did you use? These might include books,
    articles, online resources, and so on.
-   Of the research and readings you undertook, what impressed you as
    being most interesting or relevant?
-   What kinds of experiments did you undertake with this project? What
    did you build, write, craft, or try? How did you spend your time,
    and how did it go?
-   What went well, where did you struggle, and how do you feel about
    the process you undertook during this project?
-   What were the best and worst moments of this project? What did you
    learn from these moments?
-   Are you proud of this project? Is it your best work? What grade
    would you give yourself?
-   How might you have improved this project, of your experience of it?
-   What did you learn about interdisciplinarity while working on this
    project?
-   What did you learn about yourself while working on this project?
-   What will you remember about this project in five years?
-   How does what you learned apply to your studies at Kwantlen and to
    your sense of your future direction?
-   What advice would you give to others who might be undertaking a
    similar project?
-   What did this project mean to you? What might it mean for others?
-   Do you plan to continue this project further, or to work on similar
    projects in the future?
-   You learned something crucial in this project which you won’t
    discover for a while. Make a guess now about what that might be.

Each of the three projects is worth 25 per cent each of your final
grade.

### Group Presentations

Each student will be a member of several different peer groups; each
peer group will present mini-presentations on various mythological
motifs and characters. Class time will be given for preparing the
presentations. The structure and content of the presentations will be
discussed in class.

The central idea of the presentations for this course is to give you
opportunities to practice interdisciplinary thinking and expression. As
such, the presentation should be interdisciplinary. Essentially, this
means that you should try to use multiple presentation strategies and
modalities. These might include (but are certainly not limited to) any
of the following:

-   Storytelling
-   Poetry
-   Music (playing)
-   Drumming
-   Singing
-   Dance
-   Movement
-   Sport
-   Ritual
-   Film (showing)
-   Film making
-   Photography
-   Web content
-   Craft work
-   Art making
-   Individual reflection
-   Meditation
-   Health practices
-   Creative process (any type)
-   Group communication
-   Cultural practices
-   Nature experiences

#### Suggested Themes and Topics for Presentations

##### Mythic Themes

-   The primordial universe
-   The flood
-   The tree
-   Mother and father
-   The trickster
-   Fire (and water)
-   Water (and fire)
-   Death
-   The end of the World
-   Sky (and earth)
-   Earth (and sky)
-   Time, ages, and seasons
-   The afterlife
-   Birth
-   Reality (and dreams)
-   Dreams (and reality)
-   Passageways
-   The vessel of salvation
-   The object of power
-   The sacred mountain
-   Light (and darkness)
-   Darkness (and light)
-   Sound (and silence)
-   Silence (and sound)
-   The sacrifice

##### Specific Examples

-   Akhenaten and the invention of monotheism
-   Albrecht Durer and alchemy
-   Chenrizi and the politics of China
-   Chuang Tzu and the butterfly
-   Dzogchen and Primordial Illumination
-   Fulcanelli and mysteries of the cathedrals
-   Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic tradition
-   Howard Carter and "wonderful things"
-   Mary Shelley and the genesis of *Frankenstein*
-   Nikola Tesla and universal energy
-   Philip K. Dick, VALIS, and 2-3-74
-   R.D. Laing and madness as reality
-   Ramanujan’s notebooks
-   Richard Feynman and the invention of quantum mechanics
-   Schwaller de Lubicz at Karnak
-   Simone Weil and leading from desire
-   St. Exupery flying into the desert
-   The Reimann Hypothesis
-   The Voynich Manuscript
-   The visions of Hildegard of Bingen
-   Thoth’s legacy
-   Walter Benjamin and the Angel of History
-   Wilhelm Reich’s Cloudbuster
-   William Blake’s *Marriage of Heaven and Hell*
-   The Baalbek stones
-   The mystery of the Olmecs
-   Tibetan Tertons and hidden treasure
-   The Kaaba stone and its tangled history
-   The disappearance of the Ark of the Covenant
-   The theft of the benben stone
-   The lies and truths of Carlos Castaneda
-   The Dogon and Sirius
-   The grail, *sang real*, and pop culture
-   Friday the 13th, the Templars, and the lost treasure
-   The Ancients, the Aliens, and the History Channel
-   Ganthet, Merlin, Gandalf, and other guardians
-   The jaguar, the shaman, and the Amazon

Whenever possible (and workable), try to mix together multiple
modalities into a single presentation. For example, you might ask the
group to do some individual reflection using the modality of poetry,
then create a series of movements based on the poetry, then work in
small groups to talk about and share the process. Many configurations
are possible. The trick is to choose an activity that you enjoy, then
find a way to apply it to the content. Please do not create your
presentations using only written and/or spoken materials. In other
words, don’t just stand up at the front of the class and talk about the
presentation topic. Utilize the energy of the group. Remember that in
interdisciplinary work divergences are valued as unique opportunities.
So, feel free to experiment with activities and modalities that may not
seem, on the surface, to be related to the topic at hand but which
might, upon experiment, yield surprising connections and results. Be
playful. Allow yourself to laugh at yourself, to be embarrassed, to
engage with the process in novel and interesting ways.

The group presentations are worth a total of 25 per cent of your grade.

### Assessment for Group Presentations

#### Class and Instructor Assessment

After each presentation, time will be set aside for class peers and the
instructor to assess and give feedback on the presentations. Each group
will design a rubric and questions for us to use in assessing each
presentation. This feedback can sometimes be the most valuable part of
the performance for everyone involved. It’s an opportunity to see what
worked, what landed with the audience and what didn’t. This conversation
can help the audience articulate struggles, questions and insights about
what makes for an effective performance. By designing a rubric and
questions for the audience to contemplate (either during or after the
performance, depending on the goals and the presentation), you invite
everyone to reflect on the nature and purpose of group sharing and
performance.

#### Self and Group Assessment

This course utilizes experiential learning approaches which depend upon
student involvement and active participation. Accordingly, the following
criteria are used to evaluate overall participation and engagement in
the group presentations and the class:

-   Willingness to take appropriate risks and to challenge oneself.
-   Willingness to speak up and to lead.
-   Openness to interpersonal process.
-   Willingness to collaborate with others.
-   Consideration of and responsiveness to others.
-   Commitment to enhancing the interpersonal experience of everyone in
    the group.
-   Willingness to examine personal values, beliefs, and judgments.
-   Ability to take personal responsibility for learning.
-   Willingness to deal with conflicts appropriately if and when they
    arise.
-   Ability to be open and responsive to appropriate feedback.

Course Evaluation
-----------------

It is difficult (or at least different) to translate evaluation in an
IDEA course into a letter grade. I prefer to speak about evaluation and
assessment, not marks. Evaluation in this course takes several forms: I
evaluate you, you evaluate me, you evaluate yourself, and you evaluate
each other. I have started by describing a skill set. This is the focus
of the evaluation. You need to demonstrate to yourself (and to me) that
you have changed (that you have improved your skills) from the start of
the course to the end of the course. It is that simple, in principle.
Your level of improvement will translate to a letter grade using the
following descriptors:

### A-/ A/ A+

Has attained a high level of competency in all, or almost all, of the
stated skill areas. This competency would allow the student to complete
excellent interdisciplinary inquiry projects in any area. This would be
recognizable by any facilitator and the peer group. The student is aware
of any remaining area of skill vulnerability, has shown improvement in
that area, has developed strategies for minimizing its adverse effects,
and has a plan of action for personal and professional development.

### B-/ B/ B+

Has attained a high level of competency in many (but not all) of the
stated skill areas, or has attained moderate competency in all of the
skill areas. This competency allows the completion of good inquiry
projects. The student will have developed a plan of action for further
development in those areas which need it.

### C- /C /C+

Has attained a moderate level of competency in some of the stated skill
areas or has attained a low level of competency in all of the skill
areas. The student will recognize the deficiencies or concerns and will
have discussed a plan of action to deal with the concerns.

Learning Criteria
-----------------

The evidence for your learning will develop as a consequence of your
involvement with many tools and learning contexts. The tools will
include the development and utilization of criteria for evaluating
yourself, your peers, and the works you read and create. The contexts
include group work, your individual project, writing, presentations, and
discussions. This course is a space for participating in a variety of
formats and to work on those skills that need the most attention. Using
the IDEA skill set as a guide, I will ask you to propose a grade for
each individual project. We will then negotiate a grade that seems
fitting, based on the evidence, using the following considerations:

-   Commitment to the development of self-awareness.
-   Openness to interpersonal process.
-   Ability to participate in appropriate self-disclosure.
-   Consideration of and responsiveness to others.
-   Commitment to enhancing the interpersonal experience of everyone in
    the class.
-   Willingness to examine personal values, beliefs, and judgments.
-   Ability to take personal responsibility for learning.
-   Willingness to deal with conflicts appropriately if and when they
    arise.
-   Ability to be open and responsive to appropriate feedback.

Each item on the above list is an aspect of the first item:
self-awareness. The most foundational skill in creativity is
self-awareness. Those who develop this skill consistently query their
own responses, thoughts, and feelings. They ask themselves:

-   What am I feeling right now?
-   What am I thinking right now?
-   Why am I reacting in this particular way?
-   What do my thoughts, feelings, and reactions tell me about myself?
-   Is my perception of myself consistent with what other people tell me
    about the kind of person I am?
-   When and how do I get stuck, and what am I doing to work on this?
-   In what ways do I get overwhelmed, or shut down, or avoid?

These questions, and many others, require the capacity for
self-reflection and self-awareness. As we continue in the course, you
may wish to consider these questions as they apply to you. At the very
least, you might wish to consider what you are currently working on in
your life, in which direction your attention is drawn, into which of the
innumerable themes of human nature you are now called to delve.

In my role as your instructor, I will be paying attention to how
thoughtful you are in examining and responding to questions like those
in the lists above. I will not be analyzing you, but rather noticing
what kinds of things you do, what your reactions are to various
situations. My goal in observing your behaviors and interacting with you
is to assist you in developing greater self-awareness (and, by
extension, greater empathy, creativity, and character).

I will use the lists above, as well as the assessment criteria listed
for each assignment, to assess your overall participation in the course.
I will not be evaluating your level of self-awareness but rather your
openness to the process of developing your self-awareness.

### Readings

#### Core Course Texts

-   Lewis Hyde. *Trickster Makes This World: Mischief, Myth, and Art*.
-   Michael Chabon. *Maps and Legends.*
-   Clive Barker. *Imajica.*
-   John Terpstra. *Skin Boat.*

#### Suggested Readings

-   Akenson, Donald. *The Invention of the Bible and the Talmuds.*
    Queens UP, 1998.
-   Arguelles, Jose. *The Mayan Factor.* Bear, 1987.
-   Baigent, Michael, and Leigh, Richard. *The Elixir and the Stone.*
    Penguin, 1997.
-   Biedermann, Hans. *Dictionary of Symbolism.* Facts on File, 1992.
-   Bierhorst, John. *The Mythology of North America.* William Morrow,
    1985.
-   Butala, Sharon. *Wild Stone Heart*. HarperFestival, 2000. ISBN
    000255397X.
-   Calvo, Caesar. *The Three Halves of Ino Moxo*. Translated by Kenneth
    Symington. Inner Traditions, 1995. ISBN 0892815191.
-   Campbell, Joseph. *The Mythic Image*. Princeton UP, 1974.
-   Campbell, Joseph. *Primitive Mythology.* Arcana, 1962.
-   Campbell, Joseph. *Oriental Mythology.* Arcana, 1962.
-   Campbell, Joseph. *Creative Mythology.* Arcana, 1962.
-   Campbell, Joseph. *A Skeleton Key to Finnegan’s Wake.* New World
    Library, 1944.
-   Cleary, Thomas. *The Essential Tao.* Harper, 1991.
-   Cleary, Thomas. *The Taoist I Ching.* Shambhala, 1986.
-   Davis, Wade. *The Wayfinders: Why Ancient Wisdom Matters in the
    Modern World.* Toronto: House of Anansi, 2009.
-   Diamond, Jared. *The World Until Yesterday. What Can We Learn from
    Traditional Societies?* New York: Viking, 2012.
-   Du Sautoy, M. *Symmetry.* HarperCollins, 2008.
-   Eliade, M. *The Sacred and the Profane.* Harcourt, 1987.
-   Ellis, Normandi. *Dreams of Isis: A Woman’s Spiritual Sojourn*.
    Quest, 1995.
-   Ellis, Normandi. *Awakening Osiris*. Phanes, 1988.
-   Fadiman, James. *Sufism*. Castle, 1997.
-   Galeano, Eduardo. *Genesis: Memory of Fire.* New York: Nation Books,
    1985.
-   Ginzberg, Louis. *Legends of the Bible.* Jewish Publication Society,
    1909.
-   Godwin, Michael. *The Holy Grail.* Viking, 1994.
-   Gorenberg, Gersom. *The End of Days.* Free Press, 2000.
-   Hancock, Graham. *Heaven’s Mirror: Quest for the Lost
    Civilization.*Crown, 1998.
-   Hancock, Graham. *The Sign and the Seal.*Simon and Schuster, 1992.
-   Hedges, Chris. *War Is a Force that Gives Us Meaning*. Anchor, 2003.
    ISBN 1400034639.
-   Herriot, Trevor. *Jacob’s Wound: A Search for the Spirit of
    Wildness.* Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 2004.
-   Horne, Alexander. *King Solomon’s Temple in the Masonic Tradition.*
    The Aquarian Press, 1988.
-   Hornung. E. *The Ancient Egyptian Books of the Afterlife.* Cornell
    UP, 1999.
-   Jaynes, Julian. *The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the
    Bicameral Mind.* Houghton Mifflin, 1982.
-   Joseph, Frank. *Sacred Sites of the West.* Hancock House, 1997.
-   Jung, C.G. *The Spirit in Man, Art, and Literature.* Bollingen,
    1966.
-   Jung, C.G. *The Secret of the Golden Flower.* Harvest, 1931.
-   Kelly, S. *The Book of Lost Books.* Random House, 2005.
-   King, L.W. *Enuma Elish.* The Book Tree, 1999.
-   Kingston, Maxine Hong. *The Woman Warrior: Memoirs of a Girlhood
    Among Ghosts*. Vintage, 1989. ISBN 0072435194.
-   Krippner, Stanley. *Dreamtime and Dreamwork.* Putnam, 1990.
-   Krishna, G. *Kundalini: The Secret of Yoga.* FIND Research Trust,
    1972.
-   Kwan, Michael David. *Things that Must Not be Forgotten: A Childhood
    in Wartime China*. Soho Press. ISBN 1569472823.
-   Laird, Ross A. *Grain of Truth*. MWR, 2000.
-   Laird, Ross A. *A Stone’s Throw: The Enduring Nature of Myth*.
    McClelland and Stewart, 2002.
-   Langewiesche, William. *American Ground: Unbuilding the World Trade
    Center*. North Point Press, 2002. ISBN 0865475822. (Also see *Inside
    the Sky*.)
-   Lawton, Ian. *Giza: The Truth*. Virgin, 1999.
-   Livio, M. *The Golden Ratio.* Broadway Books, 2002.
-   Lopate, Phillip. *The Art of the Personal Essay: An Anthology from
    the Classical Era to the Present*. Anchor, 1997. ISBN 038542339X.
-   Macfarlane, David. *The Danger Tree: Memory, War and the Search for
    a Family’s Past*. Walker, 2001. ISBN 0802776167.
-   Macnair, Peter; Joseph, Robert; Grenville, Bruce. *Down from the
    Shimmering Sky.* Vancouver Art Gallery, 1998.
-   Merwin, W.S. *The Mays of Ventadorn*. National Geographic
    Directions, 2002. ISBN 0792265386.
-   Monroe, Robert. *Journeys out of the Body.* Doubleday, 1985.
-   Montserrat, D. *Akhenaten.* Routledge, 2000.
-   Naydler, Jeremy. *Temple of the Cosmos*. Inner Traditions, 1996.
-   Naydler, Jeremy. *Shamanic Wisdom in the Pyramid Texts*. Inner
    Traditions, 2005.
-   Naydler, Jeremy. *The Future of the Ancient World*. Inner
    Traditions, 2009.
-   Ondaatje, Michael. *Running in the Family*. Vintage, 1993. ISBN
    0679746692.
-   Pinch, Geraldine. *Magic in Ancient Egypt.* British Museum, 1994.
-   Pirsig, Robert. *Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance*.
    HarperTorch, 2006 (reprint). ISBN 0060589469.
-   Rudgley, R. *The Lost Civilizations of the Stone Age.* Touchstone,
    2000.
-   Rushdie, Salman. *Imaginary Homelands.* Penguin, 1991.
-   Saint-Exupery, A. *Wind, Sand and Stars*. Harvest, 2002. ISBN
    0156027496.
-   Salaman, Clement. *The Way of Hermes.* Inner Traditions, 2000.
-   Schneider, Michael. *A Beginner’s Guide to Constructing the
    Universe.* Harper Perennial, 1995.
-   Schwaller de Lubicz, R. *The Temple in Man.* Inner Traditions, 1977.
-   Schwaller de Lubicz, R. *The Egyptian Miracle.* Inner Traditions,
    1980.
-   Shelley, Mary. *Frankenstein*. World Classics (reprint), 1983.
-   Storr, Anthony. *The Essential Jung.* Princeton UP, 1983.
-   Storr, Anthony. *Feet of Clay.* Free Press, 1996.
-   Sanders, Scott Russell. *Writing from the Center*. Indiana UP, 1997.
    ISBN 0253211433.
-   Smullyan, R. *The Tao is Silent.* Harper, 1977.
-   Sullivan, William. *The Secret of the Incas: Myth, Astronomy, and
    the War Against Time.* Crown, 1996.
-   Sullivan, Lawrence E. *Icanchu's Drum: An Orientation to Meaning in
    South American Religions.*New York: Macmillan, 1988.
-   Terpstra, John. *Skin Boat.* Gaspereau, 2009.
-   Thurman, R. *Tibetan Buddhism.* Castle, 1997.
-   Wallace, Amy. *Sorcerer’s Apprentice.* Frog, 2003.
-   Watson, Lyall. *The Secret Life of Inanimate Objects.* Destiny,
    1990.
-   West, John Anthony. *Serpent in the Sky.* Quest, 1993.
-   Yates, Frances. *The Occult Philosophy in the Elizabeth Age.*
    Routledge, 2001.
-   Yates, Frances. *The Art of Memory.* Chicago UP, 1966.
-   Yates, Frances. *Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition.* Chicago
    UP, 1964.

 
