Creativity and Personal Deveelopment
====================================

Interdisciplinary Expressive Arts 3100 is a course in which we focus on
creativity, on making a claim for the fundamental right of intentional
creative action. We explore the ancient and modern practices of creative
endeavor (particularly as regards family and culture), the hurdles of
creativity (as they involve craft and precision and clarity) and the
great gifts we might receive from others of our creative kin (that is to
say, the long tradition of writers, poets, sculptors, dancers,
craftspeople of all stripes, musicians, myth-makers, and so on). The
course utilizes interdisciplinary methods and practices, which offer a
single lens that moves across all domains of knowledge.

The IDEA Skill Set
------------------

Perhaps it’s most helpful to come at interdisciplinarity in terms of a
skill set. Thinking and acting in an interdisciplinary way is really a
matter of looking at the process of learning. Instead of focusing on the
“content” we might ask questions about how we identify, interpret,
create, and communicate this content. These are process questions. Below
are some examples of the kinds of considerations we will explore during
our process.

### Creating a “Good” Question

The questions we ask tell us a lot about how we think, the assumptions
we make and what we’re willing to accept as answers. What is a “good”
question? How do questions emerge? Where do they come from? How does a
question evolve? How do we hold space for our questions and how do they
“work” on us? We will discuss these questions about questions, and see
where they lead us.

### Critical Thinking and Crap Detection

We are often quick to believe what we read and what we hear, especially
when it comes from sources that we deem “authoritative.” Teachers,
journal articles, media, books, professors, parents, and peers all have
their own take on what is correct and true. Who is right? How do we know
what we’re hearing is not false or misconstrued? What is true? From what
perspective is it true? What other perspectives can be taken that are
also true? What evidence is being used to support the claim? Is the
evidence appropriate for the kind of claim being made? What ideologies,
assumptions and beliefs are at play? How do they impact the
interpretation of “facts”? And what are facts, anyway?

### Finding, Using and Evaluating Resources

Resources are what we use to accomplish something. We have internal
resources such as courage, empathy, compassion, self-awareness,
mindfulness and so on to help us create, learn and work with the
challenges of life. People in our lives such as teachers, peers,
mentors, and guides also have skills, experience, and knowledge that can
potentially help us accomplish our goals. As well, the internet, books
and other sources of information are valuable resources. How do we know
what resources we need to accomplish a goal? Are they internal,
interpersonal, or codified? What are the means by which we access these
resources? How do we know if the sources we’re accessing are good or the
right ones for our goal? How do we evaluate their quality?

### Communication (speaking, listening, writing, performing)

Language is expressed verbally and non-verbally in a particular
relational context of culture, values and past experience. Our ability
to translate ideas into words and actions, move an audience into a
compelling dialogue, or simply be present to someone else, requires an
awareness of these contexts and good communication skills. How does a
mindful and embodied presence shape how we speak and listen? How do we
write articulately, persuasively, and with accuracy and authenticity?
How do our values shape the way we communicate?

### Working in a Group

Groups offer invaluable opportunities for personal development and
routinely transcend the efforts of any one individual. The following
elements are some of the important capabilities required for healthy
group process:

-   building trust and a culture of collaboration
-   attending to individual needs and the needs of the group
-   sharing responsibility
-   giving and receiving feedback
-   embracing and resolving minor conflicts

Much of our class time will be spent in small and large groups exploring
and developing these skills.

### Following Through on a Process

Any creative process that generates new forms of knowledge (arts,
sciences and otherwise) typically has a number of phases. These phases
don’t always happen in order and are not necessarily distinct events,
but it’s helpful to think about the ecocycle of creative work. First,
there is the discovery of interest or passion. The question or idea may
not even be fully formed at this point, but there’s a spark that feels
like it’s worth following. Next, we immerse ourselves in the topic. We
read, have conversations, mess around with different approaches.
Basically, we commit to learning as much as we can about our passion. At
some point we have consciously consumed as much as we can about the
topic and we need a break from thinking about it. We let the questions
incubate and trust that they are working under the surface in the dark
soil. “Spring” eventually comes, perhaps after a long “winter”. Insights
and breakthroughs emerge. Little shoots pop up out of the soil. We are
careful to not jump to conclusions but instead create space for ideas
and insights to slowly emerge through a process of articulating and
capturing. In the last stages, we bring all the elements together in a
creative synthesis and share the bounty of our harvest.

What is happening at each stage of the creative process? What are the
challenges of each stage? How do we support the work that needs to be
done in each phase? How do we manage our time in such a way that we are
able to do creative work sustainably? Doing the preparatory work,
looking for and taking opportunities, experimenting, being realistic
about time, taking care of mind/body/heart/soul, and attending to other
responsibilities all require good skills in managing our time. And how
do we balance these various factors?

### Self-Awareness and Self-Evaluation

Growing personally and professionally is a process that has no end
point. Although growth is challenging and at times painful, growth is
critical to finding meaning and vitality in our life and work. Living
systems that come to an equilibrium with their environment — that stick
with the status quo and are content living in their comfort zone — do
not live for very long! For humans, growth requires self-evaluation,
which in turn involves looking at our strengths and vulnerabilities,
considering the evidence and feedback in these areas, identifying where
we wish to grow, creating a game plan for how we plan to address our
vulnerabilities, and celebrating our successes.

Self-assessment involves asking questions such about how we wish to
grow. What is involved in growing in a given area? What opportunities
can we find and/or create to grow? How do we take responsibility for
working on ourselves? How does the feedback from others and the results
of our attempts to develop tell us how we are doing? How do we decide
what to do with the feedback we receive from others?

Our Basic Approach
------------------

This course explores the many dimensions of interdisciplinary inquiry.
The course is, for the most part, led by the initiatives and interests
of students working individually and in groups. The course content will
evolve as the course develops, but will include a diverse number of
current interdisciplinary approaches within the expressive arts. These
include creative writing, music, movement, fine arts, theatre,
expressive arts therapies, storytelling, mythopoetics, photography, film
making, etc. Additionally, students will explore potential academic and
career directions within the cultural and social services sectors.

In this course we stake out the territory of the creative, inspecting
the geology of its forms and ideals, finding our own individual places
to homestead. Creativity involves the search for truth, yet also an
awareness that truth and fact are often provisional, and mythological;
they are shapeshifters on the wide-open plain of creativity. We will
explore what this means, and what to do about it.

And, finally, the goal of the course (from my point of view, at least),
is to have fun: to preserve and nurture the creative and imaginative
spirit that is the foundation of all the arts and sciences.

Learning Experiences
--------------------

The course will include a variety of learning experiences contingent
upon regular attendance and dedicated participation. Because creativity
is an interactive process, much of the class time will be devoted to
group experiential exercises, individual reflective tasks, collaborative
endeavors, and practical assignments.

We will create a collaborative environment in this class. We are not
going to cobble together the type of group one often hears about in the
arts: competitive, cut-throat, critical. Instead, we will direct our
efforts toward building upon the individual strengths of each
participant, finding ways for each of us to be self-reflective in terms
of assessing our creative work, discovering a means of protecting the
quality and integrity of our writing. The creative spirit is remarkably
persistent, yet it is also fragile, especially at its inception, and we
must be conscious of this fragility. Think about it: did you not
experience, as a child, the strangulation of your creativity in school,
by way of a culture of insensitive peers or teachers? Why do you think
hardly anyone feels comfortable singing in public, or dancing, or
drawing, or reading their written work to others? We have, most of us,
been the victims of inappropriate feedback and judgment. We have to be
careful about this, in our course, so that we do not harm one another.

### Themes

#### The Nature of Interdisciplinarity

Definitions and principles. Clarifications of common misunderstandings
about interdisciplinary approaches and practices. An introduction to
interdisciplinarity as a mode of inquiry in the arts and sciences.

#### Traditions and Practices

Consideration of interdisciplinary practices as effective vehicles for
the transmission of sacred, social, political, artistic, and scientific
information. Examination of interdisciplinarity as a fundamental and
necessary function of human nature and inquiry.

#### Developments and Milestones

Consideration of the development of interdisciplinarity and its role in
the contemporary world. Examination of the relationship between
interdisciplinary practices and traditional, faculty-based inquiry in
the academic environment.

#### Themes and Philosophies

Introduction to the historical background of interdisciplinary
philosophy and practice in science and literature. Explication of
ancient world views, with particular emphasis on spirituality, science,
mythological concepts, and approaches to the imagination.

#### Interdisciplinarity in the Expressive Arts

Exploration of the transmission of interdisciplinary philosophies and
practices by way of the expressive arts. Examination of practices and
structures within the interdisciplinary expressive arts (writing,
storytelling, dance, movement, ritual, religious practice, music,
philosophy, etc.), with emphasis on the traditions of psychology and
mythology. Reading of selected texts within the interdisciplinary
expressive arts. Examination of the ways in which texts within the
interdisciplinary expressive arts have influenced the development of the
arts and sciences.

#### Multicultural Principles

Introduction to the interdisciplinary contributions made by Asian
mythology, literature, and science. Explication of ancient Asian world
views, with particular emphasis on interdisciplinary spirituality,
mythological concepts, and approaches to knowledge. Reading of excerpts
from Asian texts, with particular emphasis on the synthesis of
interdisciplinary expressive arts within those traditions.

#### Other Stuff (that we'll think up as we go along)

Much of the course content will be generated by students.

### Principles

The interdisciplinary perspective is one in which the network of
disciplines is the domain. If traditional disciplines are described as a
network of nodes, the following structure outlines the interdisciplinary
approach:

-   Each traditional discipline is a node.
-   Each node is connected to every other node.
-   The nodes are connected by numerous (theoretically infinite)
    pathways.
-   Interdisciplinary learners study the pathways.

As with other disciplines, the study of the pathways (Interdisciplinary
Studies) has its own set of guiding principles, which might be outlined
as follows:

Translinearity
:   Focus on pathways and different perspectives (between and across
    fields, domains, curriculum, bodies of knowledge, networks and
    actor-networks, academic and social structures).
Integration
:   Focus on the shared characteristics of nodes, multiple sources and
    experiences, various settings, diverse and contradictory points of
    view, contextuality.
Hermeneutics
:   Focus on interpretation and meaning, analysis of verbal and
    nonverbal forms of communication, exploration and analysis of
    assumptions, presuppositions, pre-understandings, attention to the
    meaning of language. (The term *Hermeneutic* is derived from the
    mythological Hermes/Thoth: boundary-crosser, keeper of keys, god of
    trespass and wisdom, inventor of the arts and sciences.)
Optionality
:   Focus on auxiliary functions of domains and knowledge,
    transferability, redundancy, bricolage, wandering, accidents,
    boundary-crossing, maximal exposure to forking avenues.
Networks
:   Focus on nonlinearity, robustness, cascades, recursive links, black
    swans, interdependence, percolation, complexity.

Interdisciplinarity is a lens that moves across all domains. That lens
might be called the node of Interdisciplinarity.

### Group Presentations

Each participant will help develop, with two or three other class
members, one or two group presentations. The schedule for presentations
will be determined in class. Selecting a topic, and with prior
instructor approval, each group will present for between 20 and 40
minutes. The presentations must provide an experiential component, a
group discussion component, and an informational component.
Additionally, each group must provide approximately equal presentation
time to each of its members. Each group will also prepare a handout
summary of their topic (with short reference bibliography, as required)
to present to each member of the class as a professional resource.

The central idea of the presentations for this course is to give you
opportunities to practice interdisciplinary thinking, collaboration, and
expression. As such, the group presentations should be
interdisciplinary. Essentially, this means that you should try to use
multiple presentation strategies and modalities. These might include
(but are certainly not limited to) any of the following:

-   Storytelling
-   Poetry
-   Music (playing)
-   Drumming
-   Singing
-   Dance
-   Movement
-   Sport
-   Ritual
-   Film (showing)
-   Film making
-   Photography
-   Web content
-   Craft work
-   Art making
-   Individual reflection
-   Meditation
-   Health practices
-   Creative process (any type)
-   Group communication
-   Cultural practices
-   Nature experiences

Whenever possible (and workable), try to mix together multiple
modalities into a single presentation. For example, you might ask the
group to do some individual reflection using the modality of poetry,
then create a series of movements based on the poetry, then work in
small groups to talk about and share the process. Many configurations
are possible. The trick is to choose an activity that you enjoy, then
find a way to apply it to the content (suggested presentation topics
will be discussed in class). Please do not create your group
presentations using only written and/or spoken materials. In other
words, don't just stand up at the front of the class and talk about the
presentation topic. Utilize the energy of the group. Feel free to
experiment with activities and modalities that may not seem, on the
surface, to be related to the topic at hand but which might, upon
experiment, yield surprising connections and results. Be playful. Allow
yourself to laugh at yourself, to be embarrassed, to engage with the
process in novel and interesting ways.

The presentations should (ideally) not be complete explanations or
presentations of material. Feel free to play with challenging exercises,
with impossible scenarios, and other conundra. The best presentations
offer more questions than answers. They, are, essentially, gateways into
the mysterious–which, as Einstein will tell you, is an important place
to be:

> "The most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious. It is
> the source of all true art and science."

The group projects are replicas, in miniature, of your involvement in
the entire class. They are worth a total of 25 per cent of your grade.

### Suggested Topics for Interdisciplinary Presentations

-   Akhenaten and the invention of monotheism
-   Albrecht Durer and alchemy
-   Aristotle's book of comedy
-   Bill Evans and the Peace Piece
-   Buckminster Fuller and the geodesic
-   Chenrizi and the politics of China
-   Chuang Tzu and the butterfly
-   Coleridge and the person from Porlock
-   Csikszentmihalyi and the flow experience
-   David Bohm's Implicate Order
-   Darwin, the bassoon, and the sundew
-   Eugen Herrigel and the practice of archery
-   Francis Yates and the *Art of Memory*
-   Freud, Jung, and the "bosh" incident
-   Fulcanelli and *Mysteries of the Cathedrals*
-   Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic tradition
-   Godel's uncertainty principle
-   Hanna Arendt at Nuremberg
-   Henri Rousseau in the jungle
-   Howard Carter and "wonderful things"
-   Jacob Bronowski at Auschwitz
-   Jacob Bronowski, Nagasaki, and *Science and Human Values*
-   Jan Tschichold and the Nazis
-   John Cage on the subway with the *I Ching*
-   Kepler's *Somnium*
-   Mary Shelley and the genesis of *Frankenstein*
-   Newton's *Principia*
-   Nikola Tesla and universal energy
-   Philip K. Dick, VALIS, and 2-3-74
-   Picasso, Guernica, and Expo 1937
-   R.D. Laing and madness as reality
-   Ramanujan's notebooks
-   Richard Feynman and the invention of quantum mechanics
-   Schwaller de Lubicz at Karnak
-   Simone Weil and leading from desire
-   St. Exupery flying into the desert
-   The Reimann Hypothesis
-   The Voynich Manuscript
-   The visions of Hildegard of Bingen
-   Thoth's legacy
-   Walter Benajmin and the Angel of History
-   Wendell Berry going *Into the Woods*
-   Wilhelm Reich's Cloudbuster
-   William Blake's *Marriage of Heaven and Hell*

### Assessment for Group Presentations

#### Class and Instructor Assessment

After each presentation, time will be set aside for class peers and the
instructor to assess and give feedback on the presentations. Each group
will design a rubric and questions for us to use in assessing each
presentation. This feedback can sometimes be the most valuable part of
the performance for everyone involved. It’s an opportunity to see what
worked, what landed with the audience and what didn’t. This conversation
can help the audience articulate struggles, questions and insights about
what makes for an effective performance. By designing a rubric and
questions for the audience to contemplate (either during or after the
performance, depending on the goals and the presentation), you invite
everyone to reflect on the nature and purpose of group sharing and
performance.

#### Self and Group Assessment

This course utilizes experiential learning approaches which depend upon
student involvement and active participation. Accordingly, the following
criteria are used to evaluate overall participation and engagement in
the group presentations (and the class):

-   Willingness to take appropriate risks and to challenge oneself.
-   Willingness to speak up and to lead.
-   Openness to interpersonal process.
-   Willingness to collaborate with others.
-   Consideration of and responsiveness to others.
-   Commitment to enhancing the interpersonal experience of everyone in
    the group.
-   Willingness to examine personal values, beliefs, and judgments.
-   Ability to take personal responsibility for learning.
-   Willingness to deal with conflicts appropriately if and when they
    arise.
-   Ability to be open and responsive to appropriate feedback.

### Individual Projects

Projects in this course entail three linked assignments and several
presentations. The assignments may be comprised of any type of creative
expression (writing, music, imagery, dance, movement, photography,
health practices, craft, etc.). The central idea is for you to choose a
specific theme or thread and explore it in some depth. We will discuss
these projects at length in class. They are opportunities for you to
discover and explore creativity in your own life. Each assignment is
worth 25 per cent of your grade. However, as the three assignments are
linked together thematically, another way to view this arrangement might
be as a single project in three parts.

I do not prescribe a particular length or structure for the projects.
These details are up to you. There is no upper limit on the length or
complexity of the projects.

Each individual project will include a written self-assessment of at
least 500 words. The self-assessment will include answers to the
following questions (answers need not be itemized):

-   What research did you do to prepare for this project? Research might
    include readings, investigative interviews, online searches,
    self-reflections, ruminations, and many other modalities.
-   What learning resources did you use? These might include books,
    articles, online resources, and so on.
-   Of the research and readings you undertook, what impressed you as
    being most interesting or relevant?
-   What kinds of experiments did you undertake with this project? What
    did you build, write, craft, or try? How did you spend your time,
    and how did it go? (Look at the criteria on the next page.)
-   What went well, where did you struggle, and how do you feel about
    the process you undertook during this project?
-   What were the best and worst moments of this project? What did you
    learn from these moments?
-   How might you have improved this project, of your experience of it?
-   What did you learn about interdisciplinarity while working on this
    project?
-   What did you learn about yourself while working on this project?
-   What will you remember about this project in five years?
-   How does what you learned apply to your studies at Kwantlen and to
    your sense of your future direction?
-   What advice would you give to others who might be undertaking a
    similar project?
-   What did this project mean to you? What might it mean for others?
-   Do you plan to continue this project further, or to work on similar
    projects in the future?
-   You learned something crucial in this project which you won’t
    discover for a while. Make a guess now about what that might be.

Evaluation
----------

It is difficult (or at least different) to translate evaluation in an
IDEA course into a letter grade. I prefer to speak about evaluation and
assessment, not marks. Evaluation in this course takes several forms: I
evaluate you, you evaluate me, you evaluate yourself, and you evaluate
each other. I have started by describing a skill set. This is the focus
of the evaluation. You need to demonstrate to yourself (and to me) that
you have changed (that you have improved your skills) from the start of
the course to the end of the course. It is that simple, in principle.
Your level of improvement will translate to a letter grade using the
following descriptors:

### A-/ A/ A+

Has attained a high level of competency in all, or almost all, of the
stated skill areas. This competency would allow the student to complete
excellent interdisciplinary inquiry projects in any area. This would be
recognizable by any facilitator and the peer group. The student is aware
of any remaining area of skill vulnerability, has shown improvement in
that area, has developed strategies for minimizing its adverse effects,
and has a plan of action for personal and professional development.

### B-/ B/ B+

Has attained a high level of competency in many (but not all) of the
stated skill areas, or has attained moderate competency in all of the
skill areas. This competency allows the completion of good inquiry
projects. The student will have developed a plan of action for further
development in those areas which need it.

### C- /C /C+

Has attained a moderate level of competency in some of the stated skill
areas or has attained a low level of competency in all of the skill
areas. The student will recognize the deficiencies or concerns and will
have discussed a plan of action to deal with the concerns.

Learning Criteria
-----------------

The evidence for your learning will develop as a consequence of your
involvement with many tools and learning contexts. The tools will
include the development and utilization of criteria for evaluating
yourself, your peers, and the works you read and create. The contexts
include group work, your individual project, writing, presentations, and
discussions. This course is a space for participating in a variety of
formats and to work on those skills that need the most attention. Using
the IDEA skill set as a guide, I will ask you to propose a grade for
yourself. We will negotiate a grade that seems fitting, based on the
evidence, using the following considerations:

-   Commitment to the development of self-awareness.
-   Openness to interpersonal process.
-   Ability to participate in appropriate self-disclosure.
-   Consideration of and responsiveness to others.
-   Commitment to enhancing the interpersonal experience of everyone in
    the class.
-   Willingness to examine personal values, beliefs, and judgments.
-   Ability to take personal responsibility for learning.
-   Willingness to deal with conflicts appropriately if and when they
    arise.
-   Ability to be open and responsive to appropriate feedback.

Each item on the above list is an aspect of the first item:
self-awareness. The most foundational skill in creativity is
self-awareness. Those who develop this skill consistently query their
own responses, thoughts, and feelings. They ask themselves:

-   What am I feeling right now?
-   What am I thinking right now?
-   Why am I reacting in this particular way?
-   What do my thoughts, feelings, and reactions tell me about myself?
-   Is my perception of myself consistent with what other people tell me
    about the kind of person I am?
-   When and how do I get stuck, and what am I doing to work on this?
-   In what ways do I get overwhelmed, or shut down, or avoid?

These questions, and many others, require the capacity for
self-reflection and self-awareness. As we continue in the course, you
may wish to consider these questions as they apply to you. At the very
least, you might wish to consider what you are currently working on in
your life, in which direction your attention is drawn, into which of the
innumerable themes of human nature you are now called to delve.

In my role as your instructor, I will be paying attention to how
thoughtful you are in examining and responding to questions like those
in the lists above. I will not be analyzing you, but rather noticing
what kinds of things you do, what your reactions are to various
situations. My goal in observing your behaviors and interacting with you
is to assist you in developing greater self-awareness (and, by
extension, greater empathy, creativity, and character).

I will use the lists above, as well as the assessment criteria listed
for each assignment, to assess your overall participation in the course.
I will not be evaluating your level of self-awareness but rather your
openness to the process of developing your self-awareness.

Grade Inflation
---------------

Almost every semester there are students who do well on the assignments,
complete all the associated learning goals of the course, participate
well, and wonder why they do not receive a grade of one hundred percent
(or 98, anyway). Here is the reason: almost every semester there are
students who demonstrates a level of commitment that goes beyond the
course requirement. Such students complete extra work, or hand in
exemplary assignments, or undertake a significant amount of personal
development in addition to the course expectations. Such students
typically receive the highest grades.

If you do reasonably well in the course you will receive a reasonable
grade. Very high grades are intended for extra or exemplary work.
Unfortunately, over the past thirty years the post-secondary educational
system in North America has participated in a process of grade
inflation. Since the 1980’s, the average grade for typical course work
has been increasing by about 25 per cent each decade. Elevated
assessments do not accurately reflect the work of most students. Even
worse, grade inflation has caused many students to expect high grades
for average work. I am not a overly stringent assessor, but I will not
inflate grades artificially.

In this course a small number of students will (likely) receive high
grades; most students will receive grades in the middle range; and a few
students will struggle with lower grades. If you are uncertain about
your assessment for a given assignment, or if you would like suggestions
for how to improve your grade, please ask me for clarification.

If you wish to achieve a good grade, please do the following:

-   Show up for class – every class. This course depends on student
    engagement. (This becomes especially important during the final
    weeks of the semester.)
-   Be attentive and mindful to the various criteria listed for each of
    the projects and the course overall.
-   Take the initiative to plan and develop your projects and
    presentations. This course is (very likely) more fluid and
    spontaneous than you are used to. Your ability to manage your time,
    commitment, and energy is crucial.
-   Speak up in every class (review the criteria for group engagement
    and presentations).
-   Don’t look for the right answer to a question or challenge. Instead,
    find the answer that is meaningful to you.
-   Ask for help if you need it.
-   Be attentive to the Kwantlen policies on [academic
    honesty](http://www.kwantlen.ca/__shared/assets/Honesty1432.pdf) and [plagiarism](http://www.kwantlen.ca/policies/C-LearnerSupport/c08.pdf).
-   Commit to your projects in a substantial way. Good projects take
    time. Rushed projects are obviously rushed.
-   Have fun. Authentic learning begins with joy.

### Readings

Please read at least three of the following books.

-   David Edwards. *The Lab: Creativity and Culture*.
-   Jaron Lanier. *You are Not a Gadget*.
-   Lewis Hyde.*Trickster Makes this World: Mischief, Myth, and Art.\
    *
-   Nassim Nicholas Taleb. *Antifragile: Things that Gain from
    Disorder.*
-   Jonah Lehrer. *How Creativity Works.*
-   Robert Pirsig. *Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance.*
-   Maxine Greene. *Releasing the Imagination: Essays on Education, the
    Arts, and Social Change*.
-   Frank Barron, ed. *Creators on Creating: Awakening and Cultivating
    the Imaginative Mind*.
-   Ross Laird. *Grain of Truth: The Ancient Lessons of Craft.*

#### Recommended Readings

-   Allen, Pat. *Art is a Way of Knowing.* Shambhala, 1995.
-   Butala, Sharon. *Wild Stone Heart*. HarperFestival, 2000. ISBN
    000255397X.
-   Calvo, Caesar. *The Three Halves of Ino Moxo*. Translated by Kenneth
    Symington. Inner Traditions, 1995. ISBN 0892815191.
-   Campbell, Joseph. *The Mythic Image*. Princeton UP, 1974.
-   Ellis, Normandi. *Dreams of Isis: A Woman's Spiritual Sojourn*.
    Quest, 1995.
-   Hancock, Graham. *Heaven's Mirror: Quest for the Lost
    Civilization.*. Crown, 1998.
-   Hedges, Chris. *War Is a Force that Gives Us Meaning*. Anchor,
    2003.ISBN 1400034639.
-   Kingston, Maxine Hong. *The Woman Warrior: Memoirs of a Girlhood
    Among Ghosts*. Vintage, 1989. ISBN 0072435194.
-   Kwan, Michael David. *Things that Must Not be Forgotten: A Childhood
    in Wartime China*. Soho Press ISBN 1569472823.
-   Laird, Ross A. *A Stone's Throw; The Enduring Nature of Myth*. M&S,
    2003.
-   Langewiesche, William. *American Ground: Unbuilding the World Trade
    Center*. North Point Press, 2002. ISBN 0865475822. Also see *Inside
    the Sky*.)
-   London, Peter. *No More Secondhand Art.* Boston: Shambhala, 1989.
-   Lopate, Phillip. *The Art of the Personal Essay: An Anthology from
    the Classical Era to the Present*. Anchor, 1997.
-   Macfarlane, David. *The Danger Tree: Memory, War and the Search for
    a Family's Past*. Walker, 2001.
-   McNiff, S. *Art Heals: How Creativity Cures the Soul.* Boston:
    Shambhala Publications, 2004.
-   Merwin, W.S. *The Mays of Ventadorn*. National Geographic
    Directions, 2002.
-   Naydler, Jeremy: *The Future of the Ancient World.* Inner
    Traditions, 2009.
-   Ondaatje, Michael. *Running in the Family*. Vintage, 1993.
-   Saint-Exupery, A. *Wind, Sand and Stars*. Harvest, 2002.
-   Sanders, Scott Russell. *Writing from the Center*. Indiana UP, 1997.
-   Sullivan, William. *The Secret of the Incas: Myth, Astronomy, and
    the War Against Time.* Crown, 1996.
-   Wilson, Frank. *The Hand: How Its Use Shapes the Brain, Language and
    Human Culture.* New York: Vintage, 1998.

#### Further Readings on Creativity and Associated Philosophies

-   Achebe, Chinua. *Hopes and Impediments*. New York: Doubleday, 1989.
-   Barron, F., ed. *Creators on Creating: Awakening and Cultivating the
    Imaginative Mind*. New York: Putnam, 1997.
-   Benjamin, Walter. *Theses on the Philosophy of History*.
-   Borges, Jorge Luis.. *Collected Fictions*. Penguin, 1999.
-   Bohm, David. *Wholeness and the Implicate Order*. London: Ark, 1980.
-   Bohm, David. *Unfolding Meaning*. New York: Routledge, 1985.
-   Bohm, David. *On Creativity*. New York: Routledge, 1998.
-   Bronowski, Jacob. *Science and Human Values*. New York: Harper,
    1956.
-   Bronowski, Jacob. *The Face of Violence*. London: Turnstile Press,
    1964.
-   Bronowski, Jacob. *A Sense of the Future: Essays in Natural
    Philosophy*. Cambridge, MIT Press, 1977.
-   Degler, Teri. *The Fiery Muse: Creativity and the Spiritual Quest*.
    Toronto: Random House, 1996.
-   Demos, John.. *The Unredeemed Captive: A Family Story from Early
    America*. Vintage, 1995.
-   Flack, Audrey. *Art and Soul: Notes on Creating*. New York: Penguin,
    1986.
-   Franklin, Ursula. *The Real World of Technology*. Toronto: Anansi,
    1999.
-   Fulford, Robert. *The Triumph of Narrative: Storytelling in an Age
    of Mass Culture*. Toronto: Anansi, 1999.
-   Goldberg, Natalie. *Writing Down the Bones*. Boston: Shambhala,
    1986.
-   Herrigel, Eugen. *Zen in the Art of Archery*. New York: Random
    House, 1977.
-   Hildegard of Bingen. *Secrets of God: Writings of Hildegard of
    Bingen*. Boston: Shambhala, 1996.
-   Hyde, Lewis. *The Gift: Imagination and the Erotic Life of
    Property*. New York: Vintage, 1983.
-   Jimenez, Juan Ramon. *The Complete Perfectionist: A Poetics of
    Work*. Edited and translated by Christopher Maurer. New York:
    Doubleday, 1997.
-   Jung, C.G. *The Spirit in Man, Art and Literature*. Translated by
    R.F.C. Hull. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998.
-   London, Peter. *No More Secondhand Art*. Boston: Shambhala, 1989.
-   Lorca, Federico. *In Search of Duende*. Translated by Christopher
    Maurer. New York: New Directions, 1998.
-   Lyndon, Susan. *The Knitting Sutra: Craft as a Spiritual Practice*.
    San Francisco: Harper, 1997.
-   Needleman, Carla. *The Work of Craft: An Inquiry Into the Nature of
    Crafts and Craftsmanship*. New York: Kodansha, 1979.
-   Pye, David. *The Nature and Art of Workmanship*. Cambridge:
    Cambridge UP, 1968.
-   Richards, Mary. *Centering in Pottery, Poetry and the Person*.
    Middletwon, CT: Wesleyan UP.
-   Sarton, May. *Journal of a Solitude*. New York: Norton, 1973.
-   Sennett, Richard. *The Corrosion of Character: The Personal
    Consequences of Work in the New Capitalism*. New York: Norton, 1998.
-   Taleb, Nicholas Nassim. *Fooled by Randomness.* New York: Random
    House, 2005.
-   Taleb, Nicholas Nassim. *The Black Swan.* New York: Random House,
    2008.
-   Thoreau, Henry David. *Walden*. New York: Norton, 1985.
