
Annotated Bibiliography
=======================

Ambrose, S. A., Bridges, M.W., Dipietro,, M., Lovett, M.C., & Norman, M.K. (2010). *How learning works: Seven research-based principles for smart teaching*. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Discusses general principles for teaching excellence, including: bridging teaching and learning; how prior knowledge affects learning; the implications of how students organize knowledge; what motivates students; how students develop mastery; what kinds of practice and feedback enhance learning; why course climates matters; and how to encourage self-direction. There is also an extensive set of appendices, with many examples. *Appendix C: What are Rubrics and How Can We Use Them?* is especially helpful in terms of thinking about assessment. Ambrose at el suggest that “if the instructor’s objective is for students to develop more sophisticated *process* skills (for example, researching relevant design ideas to spur their creativity, recording their exploration of multiple concepts, and explaining their design choices and revisions along the way to a final product), it may be necessary not only to express these goals explicitly but also to articulate what students need to do to meet the assignment’s objectives (for example, keeping a process journal in which they document their design iterations and explain their thought processes). It may also help to explain to students why these particular goals are important (for example, “Developing strong process skills will help you become more consistent and more able to handle complex tasks”) (204). The book also argues that “while we cannot control the developmental process, we can shape the intellectual, social, emotional, and physical aspects of the classroom climate in developmentally appropriate ways. In fact, many studies have shown that the climate we create has implications for our students. A negative climate may impede learning and performance, but a positive climate can energize students’ learning” (6).

Kennedy, D., Hyland, A., & Ryan, N. (2006). *Writing and using learning outcomes: A practical guide*. In Froment, E., Kohler, J., Purser, L., & Wilson, L. (Eds). *EUA Bologna Handbook — Making Bologna Work*. Berlin, Germany: Raabe Verlag. This chapter of the Bologna Process implemtation guide discusses considerations for creating effective learning outcomes in programs and courses that utlize the Bologna process. The text explores the implications of a core approach: *… The principal question asked of the student or the graduate will therefore no longer be “what did you do to obtain your degree?” but rather “what can you do now that you have obtained your degree?” (Purser, Council of Europe, 2003). Kennedy et al argue that “the international movement away from a “teacher-centred” approach to a more “outcome-based” approach to education has gained increased momentum from the Bologna process, with its emphasis on student-centred learning and the need to have more precision and clarity in the design and content of curricula. It is clear that learning outcomes play a key role in ensuring transparency of qualifications and of qualification frameworks” (28).

Campbell, G. (2013). *The single most consequential thing we do in universities: a case study in teaching assessment to new academics*. In Salter, D. J. (Ed), *Cases on quality teaching practices in higher education*. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Discusses a general approach to assessment that was developed for the New Academics Programme at the University of Manchester. Campbell argues that “designing good assessments, giving feedback, and matching achievement to intended learning outcomes, … [are] all appropriate, and that delivering [these] through a combination of presentation, group exercises, and discussion gives a coherent and powerful experience” (328).

Courneya, C. A. (2013). *White coat warm heART*. In Salter, D. J. (Ed), *Cases on quality teaching practices in higher education*. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Discusses the uses of art and art-making approaches during professional medical identity formation. Shows several examples of successful learner-centered, arts-based approaches. Courneya confirms that “the evidence therefore points to a role for arts-based courses as a way of improving observational and empathetic skills” (107). Her examples of arts-based approaches include drama, free writing, creative work in any media, among others. The emphasis is on creative expression rather than artistic skill. She closes by noting that “major academic journals allocate entire sections to this topic, national medical education conferences take ‘Arts and Humanities’ on as a theme for discussion, professional societies dedicated entirely to arts and humanities in health care are over-subscribed and across the globe research underscores the importance of arts and humanities in fostering empathy and communication skills” (116).

Pascarella, E., & Terenzini, P. (1977). *Patterns of student-faculty informal interaction beyond the classroom and voluntary freshman attrition*. Journal of Higher Education, 5, 540–552.

Pascarella, E., & Terenzini, P. (1991). *How college affects students: Findings
and insights from twenty years of research*. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Pascarella, E. T., & Terenzini, P. T. (2005). *How college affects students: A
third decade of research*. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. All three of the above explore the social and emotional world of learners. The 1991 work shows that social and emotional gains made by students during their time at university are considerably greater than their intellectual gains. This work also shows the importance of course climate in contributing to learner success. The 1997 work examines the importance of relationship-building between faculty and learners. The 2005 work discusses student challenges with self-management.

Felton, P., & Finley, A. (2013). *Motivating teaching excellence: Lessons from U.S. teaching awards*. In Salter, D.J. (Ed.), *Cases in Quality Teaching Practices in Higher Education*. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Discusses opportunities and challenges for motivating learning innovation and excellence among faculty.

Rogdgers, C. *Seeing student learning; teacher change and the role of reflection.* Harvard Educational Review, Summer 2002, 230—252. Discusses the importance of practitioner reflection and describes a four-phase reflective cylce that the author uses in her professional development work with teachers. Rodgers argues that “supportive and disciplined reflective communities of teachers can help teachers understand that their students’ learning is central, and that their own teaching is subordinate to and in service of that goal.”

Northeastern University. “Innovation Imperative: Enhancing Higher Education Outcomes.” insidehighered.com/news/2013/09/18/poll-most-americans-and-business-leaders-say-graduates-should-be-well-rounded. Northeastern University, 15 August 2013. Web. 18 September 2013. 

A survey of 263 hiring managers and an August poll of 1,000 American adults conducted by FTI Consulting on behalf of Northeastern University show that majorities of the public and business leaders value broadly applicable skills like written communication and problem-solving over specific skills obtained through applied training. The poll found that respondents overwhelmingly want colleges and universities to focus on integrating practical experience, such as internships, into their curriculums.

Grove, J. “Grades Improve When Students Lead Learning.” timeshighereducation.com. Times Higher Education, 10 September 2013. Web. 20 September 2013. 

A pilot study at Avans University of APplied Sciences in the Netherlands reports that allowing students to lead university seminars can improve both attendance and results. When only 50% of their students showed up to finance lessons at AvansU, academics decided to invite students to lead the teaching of finance seminars in 2 classes. Lecturers remained present only in a supervisory role. The study found that with students taking over the classroom, attendance rates increased from 55% to 96%, and that 86% of students passed the finance exam at the first attempt, compared with 79% of those who remained in teacher-led classes.

## References

[Greening TVET. Qualifications needs and implementation strategies, by Dr Julia Kastrup](http://www.unevoc.unesco.org/fileadmin/up/background_greening_tvet_nov_2013.pdf)
[Future skill needs for the green economy, by Cedefop](http://www.cedefop.europa.eu/EN/Files/5501_en.pdf)
[Developing a Greening TVET Framework, by Majumdar, Shyamal](http://www.unevoc.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/docs/Greening_TVET_Framework-Bonn-Final_Draft.pdf)
[ILO green jobs initiative and implications for skills development, by Sanchez, Ana Be-lén & Hofmann, Christine. In Cedefop ed., Future skill needs for the green economy, p. 8-23, Luxembourg.](http://www.ilo.org/global/publications/books/WCMS_159585/lang--en/index.htm)
[Skills for Green Jobs: A Global View 2011, by Strietska-Ilina, Olga; Hofmann, Christina; Mer-cedes Durán Haro, Jeon, Shinyoung. Geneva](http://www.cedefop.europa.eu/EN/Files/5501_en.pdf)
[Szovics, Peter; Tessaring, Manfred; Walmsley, Clive &amp; McGrath, John. In Cedefop ed., Future skill needs for the green economy, p. 90-94. Luxembourg.](http://www.unesco.org/education/tlsf/)
[Teaching and Learning for a Sustainable Future](http://unesco.org/education/tlsf/)
[Greening TVET for Sustainable Development. Report of the UNESCO-UNEVOC online conference. 22 October to 2 November 2012. 2013 by UNESCO-UNEVOC, Bonn.](http://www.unevoc.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/docs/e-Forum_Synthesis_report_Greening_TVET.pdf)
[Skills for green jobs. European Synthesis Report, by Cedefop. Luxembourg.](http://www.cedefop.europa.eu/EN/Files/3057_en.pdf")

